Kenya’s Ministry of Mining, Blue Economy, and Maritime Affairs has announced the establishment of a high-level technical committee to address compliance concerns raised by Tata Chemicals Magadi Ltd. in July 2026 and to resolve outstanding matters.
Also Read: Return to core values to reform Tata Sons
“Following the suspension of operations at Tata Chemicals Magadi Limited, today [September 9, 2026] at my office, I led a fruitful engagement with the Company’s executives regarding the compliance concerns we raised as a Ministry,” Hassan Ali Joho, EGH Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Mining, Blue Economy and Maritime Affairs said in a letter.
“To facilitate a comprehensive and timely resolution of the outstanding matters, we agreed to establish a high-level technical committee. The committee will be led by the Principal Secretary for Mining on behalf of the Ministry and the Chief Executive Officer of Tata Chemicals Magadi Limited on behalf of the Company,” he said.
The committee will undertake a detailed technical review of the outstanding and unresolved compliance matters, prepare and submit a report to my office for consideration and further direction, he stated.
The key “unresolved” matters to be addressed include mineral beneficiation and in-country value addition, outstanding community benefits and royalty obligations, unresolved land matters, opening up the area for multiple mineral extraction and outstanding matters with the Kajiado County Government
“As Government, we remain committed to constructive engagement with investors while firmly upholding Kenya’s laws, regulations and the interests of its people,” the Cabinet secretary said.
“The objective is not only to resolve the outstanding compliance matters but also to establish a sustainable framework that promotes responsible mining, value addition, community development and mutually beneficial partnerships,” he added.
Last week, Kenya’s President told a public meeting that he had asked Tata Chemicals to pack up and leave the country. This had caused concern among international investors on the safety of their investment in the African country.
Published - September 09, 2026 10:50 am IST
