Capgemini Government Solutions was providing the US immigration authorities with technological tools to identify and track foreign nationals.
French IT giant Capgemini announced on Saturday that it has reached a definitive agreement to sell its US subsidiary, following controversy over its links with ICE, Donald Trump's immigration police force.
The buyer is ITC Federal, "a US provider of digital services and solutions for federal agencies responsible for homeland security and defence", Capgemini said in a press release (source in French).
"This transaction is subject to the usual conditions for a deal of this kind and is expected to be completed in the coming weeks," the group said.
In February, Capgemini announced its intention to sell Capgemini Government Solutions, its US subsidiary specialising in services for federal agencies. The decision came after the disclosure of a contract with ICE covering the provision of a tool designed to identify foreign nationals present on US soil and track their movements.
At the time, Capgemini argued that "the usual legal constraints in the United States on contracting with federal entities engaged in classified activities did not allow the Group to exercise proper control over certain aspects of this subsidiary's operations".
Members of parliament, along with Economy and Finance Minister Roland Lescure, then called on the company to shed light on its activities in the United States.
Tasked with implementing the hardening of Donald Trump's immigration policy, the heavily armed ICE officers have faced fierce criticism across the United States for intervention methods considered violent. The agency was notably blamed after the shooting deaths of two US citizens in Minneapolis earlier this year.
Operating in around fifty countries, Capgemini is among the leading French companies listed on the stock exchange. The group generated turnover of 22.5 billion euros in 2025.
The subsidiary in question represented only 0.4% of the group's global turnover that year, and less than 2% of its revenues in the United States, according to Capgemini.
