NEW DELHI:
BJP
on Wednesday attacked leader of opposition in Lok Sabha,
Rahul Gandhi
, over his recent “smash the patriarchy” remark, accusing him of hypocrisy and questioning whether he applies the same principle within his own
Congress party
.
Addressing a press conference, BJP leader and MP Bansuri Swaraj referred to Congress leader’s August 22 remarks at an event in Pune, where he spoke about challenging patriarchal attitudes and restrictions placed on women.
“On August 22, Leader of Opposition (LoP) Rahul Gandhi tried to create a new false narrative in this country. He says, ‘Smash the patriarchy.’ I am all for it,” Swaraj said.
“But I want to ask Rahul Gandhi ji, do you limit the slogan of ‘smash the patriarchy’ only to the stage in Pune? Do you practise political patriarchy within your own Congress party?” she added.
Swaraj accused Rae Bareli MP of lacking a “vision” and “positive agenda”, alleging that he uses material prepared by his research team to mislead voters and young people.
BJP cites remarks against Kangana, Hema Malini
Swaraj said the Congress should begin by examining its own record if it wants to challenge patriarchy.
She cited the controversy involving Congress leader Supriya Shrinate's social media account after BJP MP Kangana Ranaut was given the party ticket from Mandi during the 2024 Lok Sabha elections.
Swaraj described the remarks posted from the account as “extremely objectionable”.
She also referred to comments made by Congress leader Randeep Surjewala about BJP leader and actor Hema Malini at a rally in Kaithal in April 2024.
Swaraj said Surjewala was subsequently barred from campaigning for 48 hours following action over the remarks.
“But Rahul Gandhi did not ‘smash the patriarchy’ then either. There was no such statement from him. Instead, he once again chose to remain silent,” she said.
Swaraj also criticised Rahul over what she described as a “highly objectionable joke” involving Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni of Italy, saying Gandhi had participated in it along with Congress leader Sandeep Dikshit.
“It does not befit the leader of opposition of the country to make such statements. It appears that leader of opposition Rahul Gandhi now makes statements solely for their meme and reel value,” Swaraj said.
BJP MP further said, "I want to ask Rahul Gandhi, why is there not a single woman leader in Karnataka and Himachal? Why did he oppose the Women's Reservation Bill? And you are talking about women empowerment?"
Highlighting Prime Minister Narendra Modi's governance model centered on women-led development, Swaraj stated, "You constantly criticize Narendra Modi, but he is a leader committed to empowering women. Currently, 48 percent of India’s women are leading startups around the world. Rahul Gandhi, I am calling you out for your misogyny. This nation deserves a better Leader of the Opposition than you, Mr. Rahul Gandhi."
What Rahul Gandhi said about patriarchy
Congress MP's remarks came during the Congress' ‘Chhatron Ki Goonj’ campaign in Pune, where he addressed thousands of women and girl students.
He said the campaign was aimed at challenging a patriarchal system that, according to him, gives men greater freedom while imposing restrictions on women.
Former Congress president referred to a video of PM Modi that he said was released after a protest at Jantar Mantar. He alleged that the Prime Minister was “culturally shocked” when girls protesting used cuss words but had no objection to boys using similar language.
Share your thoughts in the comments
Be respectful · TOI community guidelines
“Our fight is against such a mindset. We do not want a country which gives all the freedom to men, while women continue to live in a controlled environment. We will work together to end the patriarchal system in India,” Rahul said.
In an Instagram story, Congress leader had also defended actor Kriti Sanon amid criticism of her outfit in a Raksha Bandhan advertisement, saying, “What a woman wears, what she does and where she goes — is her choice.”
He added, “Stop trolling women for exercising their freedom,” using the hashtag “smash the patriarchy”.
Do you think Rahul Gandhi genuinely advocates for women empowerment within his party?
3k+ users shared opinion today
5k+ users already voted today
The remarks followed criticism of Sanon's attire in a jewellery advertisement, including from BJP MP Kangana Ranaut.
Sanon subsequently questioned why women continued to be told what to wear and said, “Culture & Traditions are in her heart, not in her neckline!”
