LG Energy Solution has started production at its new manufacturing campus in Lansing, Michigan. The site will make large-format batteries for both energy storage systems and electric vehicles. The plant aims to reach more than 35 GWh of annual lithium battery manufacturing capacity.
The facility will make lithium-iron phosphate (LFP) battery cells for ESS. The cells are integrated by LG Energy Solution Vertech, the company’s U.S. energy storage division, into complete systems for utility, grid-scale storage, and other commercial and industrial applications.
The Lansing site will also produce more energy dense nickel-manganese-cobalt (NMC) cells for Toyota. These cells will power battery electric vehicles assembled at Toyota Motor Manufacturing Kentucky (TMMK) in Georgetown, Kentucky.
“Today marks a defining milestone for LG Energy Solution. Lansing will produce advanced batteries that support not only the future of mobility, but also America’s growing energy infrastructure and digital economy,” said David Kim, CEO of LG Energy Solution. “We are strengthening America’s battery ecosystem, expanding our manufacturing footprint and reaffirming our long-term commitment to the United States.”
Since 2022, LG Energy Solution has invested more than $2 billion in the Lansing facility, which currently employs about 900 team members. At full capacity, employment is anticipated to grow to 1,700 team members, meeting its commitment to incentive job creation requirements. The Lansing site was previously a joint-venture between LGES and General Motors for EV battery production. GM sold its stake to LGES in early 2025, and the nearly-completed factory shifted to LGES ownership.
With the opening of its Lansing facility, LG Energy Solution now operates two facilities in Michigan, with the other located in Holland. LG Energy Solution plans more than 50 GWh of total LFP cell-making capacity in North America by the end of 2026 at three wholly owned plants (Holland, Lansing and NextStar Energy in Windsor, Ontario) and two joint venture facilities (L-H Battery Company in Jeffersonville, Ohio, and Ultium Cells 2 in Spring Hill, Tennessee). Overall, 80% of LG Energy Solution’s global ESS capacity will be in North America by the end of this year.
