Russian, Syrian presidents discuss plans to reorganize Hmeimim, Tartus military bases
Phone call marks 1st known contact between Putin and Sharaa since Syrian president’s January visit to Moscow
Burc Eruygur and Sahin Demir
26 August 2026•Update: 26 August 2026
ISTANBUL
Syrian presidency says Putin reaffirmed support for Syria’s unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and rejected Israeli attacks
Russian President Vladimir Putin and his Syrian counterpart Ahmad al-Sharaa on Wednesday highlighted the importance of a memorandum of understanding on reorganizing Moscow’s military presence at the Hmeimim and Tartus bases during a phone call.
In a statement, the Kremlin said the two presidents discussed the current state and prospects for further developing Moscow-Damascus ties and expressed their commitment to deepening political dialogue and cooperation in trade, economic, humanitarian and other areas.
The statement said that during an exchange of views on the situation in Syria, Putin reaffirmed his “principled position in support of the unity, territorial integrity, and sovereignty” of the country, as well as the “creation of conditions for long-term normalization and post-conflict reconstruction.”
“Both sides noted the importance of the memorandum of understanding signed on Aug. 9 on the reorganization of the Hmeimim Air Base and the Tartus Logistics Facility,” it said, adding that Putin and Sharaa agreed to continue contacts at various levels.
The Syrian presidency, for its part, said the two leaders discussed bilateral relations, ways to develop them and strengthen cooperation in areas of mutual interest.
According to the presidency, Putin reaffirmed Russia’s support for Syria’s unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity and stressed Moscow’s rejection of Israeli attacks and violations that undermine Syrian sovereignty.
The two sides also discussed regional developments and stressed the importance of continued coordination, consultations and communication between Damascus and Moscow in support of their mutual interests and security and stability in Syria and the region.
The latest phone call marks the first known contact between the two presidents since Sharaa visited the Russian capital in January.
On Aug. 9, Moscow and Damascus signed a memorandum of understanding to reorganize Russia’s presence at the Hmeimim and Tartus bases in western Syria following about 18 months of negotiations, according to the Syrian Foreign Ministry.
Russian, Syrian presidents discuss plans to reorganize Hmeimim, Tartus military bases
