The global population is ageing, but developing countries are set to see a record number of young people reach working age over the next decade, with strong working-age population growth projected to continue well beyond that. Amid slowing global growth, generating sufficient jobs for growing working-age populations is a major challenge that will shape development outcomes for decades to come. A new World Bank Group report outlines this global jobs challenge and argues that tackling it must be a critical policy priority.
Global population dynamics are shifting. Over the decade to 2035, even as fertility rates fall across the world, a record 1.2 billion young people are set to reach working age in emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) – likely the largest youth cohort ever. Moreover, within EMDEs, a regional rotation is also underway, with the youth wave increasingly concentrated within specific regions, most notably the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and sub-Saharan Africa.
These shifting dynamics are projected to sharpen further beyond the next decade. Over the next quarter-century, through 2050, sub-Saharan Africa is expected to account for more than three-quarters of the net increase in the global working-age population (Figure 1). The number of working-age people in the region is set to rise by 625 million: the largest addition that any region has ever recorded over a 25-year period. MENA is also expected to see a large increase, in both numerical and percentage terms, while South Asia will also see its working-age population rise significantly (albeit at a slower rate than in recent decades). In contrast, working-age populations look set to remain relatively stable in Europe and Central Asia as well as Latin America and the Caribbean, while in East Asia and Pacific, the working-age population is projected to fall significantly.
Figure 1. Working-age population changes by EMDE region, 2025–50
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; RHS = right-hand scale; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa. Working-age population is defined as the population aged 15–64 years. Bars show change in working-age population between 2025 and 50 in absolute terms. Diamonds show percentage change (right-hand side). Sources: UN World Population Prospects (2024), World Bank.
Meanwhile, the share of young people not in employment, education, or training (NEET) is high in all regions – estimated at double-digits in every region and over one-quarter in both the MENA and sub-Saharan Africa. Job creation is therefore critical everywhere, and particularly in those regions facing large increases in the working-age population. Large numbers of young working-age people could generate a demographic dividend which powers development for decades, but without sufficient job opportunities, they could instead become a drag.
The jobs challenge looms large in places that face particularly difficult initial conditions
Job creation is a global concern, but pressures are especially acute in EMDE regions facing rapid working-age population growth. In sub-Saharan Africa, working-age populations are projected to increase in all but two countries between 2025 and 2050, reflecting still-high fertility rates and rising life expectancy (Lam and Leibbrandt 2023). In Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mauritania, and Niger, the working-age population is projected to double for a third consecutive 25-year period, while Tanzania is projected to record a fourth consecutive doubling.
Sub-Saharan Africa’s projected demographic expansion stands out: up until now, the largest working-age population increase over a 25-year period was in East Asia and Pacific, which added 535 million working-age people between 1977 and 2002 (Figure 2). Demographic momentum is also expected to persist beyond 2050.
Figure 2. Sub-Saharan Africa’s projected demographic surge in historical regional perspective
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; RHS = right-hand scale; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa. Working-age population is defined as the population aged 15–64 years. Bars show maximum numerical increase in the working-age population over any 25-year period on record through 2050 (or projected, for SSA). Diamonds show corresponding percentage change in working-age population levels. Sources: UN World Population Prospects (2024), World Bank.
Alongside this historic demographic transition, many of the most-affected countries have limited economic resources and institutional capacity, inhibiting their ability to support job creation. Compared with other EMDE regions at the onset of their own peak working-age population increases, sub-Saharan Africa is entering its own peak period from a weaker starting point: not just relative to most other regions now, but also relative to their own peak working-age population growth periods. On a per capita basis, sub-Saharan Africa is poorer now than all other EMDE regions were on the eve of their own peak increases in working-age population, with the exception of South Asia (Figure 3).
Figure 3. EMDE regions’ per capita GDP on the eve of peak working-age population rises
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa. Working-age population is defined as the population aged 15–64 years. Bars show medians for each region on eve of largest 25-year working-age population increase period. Sources: WDI (database), World Bank.
Fiscal constraints add to these challenges. Fiscal capacity can help policymakers support job creation. However, the three regions expected to see large increases in their working-age populations face high public debt as a share of GDP. In sub-Saharan Africa, median government debt stood at 56% of GDP in 2024. In contrast, the equivalent ratio was just 19% in East Asia and Pacific in 1977 at the start of its peak working-age population surge period (Figure 4). International debt markets have evolved substantially over that time, so the situations are not like-for-like, but high debt burdens can limit scope for public spending – for example, on infrastructure, human capital development, or strengthening institutions – that can support job creation.
The wider international environment also complicates job creation prospects. Potential growth has been on a declining trend globally and is expected to be one-third lower across EMDEs in the 2020s than it was in the 2000s (Kose and Ohnsorge 2024). Near-term prospects have been further undermined by a series of overlapping global shocks in recent years, including the pandemic, conflict and geopolitical tensions, and a global inflationary episode.
Figure 4. EMDE regions’ debt-to-GDP ratios on the eve of peak working-age population rises
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; SAR = South Asia; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa. Working-age population is defined as the population aged 15–64 years. Bars show medians for each region on eve of largest 25-year working-age population increase period. Sources: Kose et al. (2022), World Bank.
Major structural shifts now underway will bring opportunities and challenges for job creation
Against this complex backdrop, significant structural shifts in the world economy are underway. These shifts are likely to have an impact on job creation prospects. Exactly how evolving developments such as artificial intelligence (AI), the energy transition, and changes in trading patterns unfold over the coming years is uncertain, and accordingly, the resulting impact on labour markets is also unclear. Yet such developments are all likely to create both opportunities and challenges for job creation, including in EMDEs.
For example, AI technologies look set to influence productivity in both advanced economies and EMDEs, although the extent of this shift will depend on how the technology develops and diffuses (World Bank 2026). The implications for jobs will also be shaped by the extent to which AI is deployed as a substitute for labour, replacing workers through automation, or a complement, freeing up workers to deliver additional aggregate output.
EMDEs are generally less exposed to the immediate disruptive effects of AI. However, they are also less prepared to harness the benefits of the technology (Cazzaniga et al. 2024). Weak electricity and digital infrastructure, limited digital skills, and constraints in the wider enabling environment can inhibit the penetration of AI, and EMDEs tend to lag advanced economies on these dimensions. Yet with relatively young populations, there is also huge potential for AI in EMDEs, and tailored technology solutions, including ‘small AI’ that focuses on affordability and accessibility in local contexts, can build on existing foundations and help fuel development progress (Kim and Qiang 2025).
Policies can turn the tide and create the conditions for sustained job creation
No single policy prescription can generate the jobs needed at the required scale, yet analyses of country experiences point to some common themes. Since 2000, economies with stronger investment growth have typically recorded significantly faster employment growth (Figure 5). Strong investment growth is likely to underpin efforts to reinvigorate output growth and foster job creation. The optimal policy mix will vary by country, but episodes of strong employment growth often follow sustained reforms implemented over many years.
Figure 5. Employment growth in EMDEs with high and low investment growth
Note: EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies. Bars show group medians. "Low" and "High" indicate annual investment growth in the bottom and top third of the distribution. Differences in median employment growth are statistically significant at the 1% level. Sample includes 69 EMDEs between 2000 and 2023. Sources: Haver Analytics, ILOSTAT (database), WDI (database), World Bank.
Three broad policy pillars consistently emerge as critical in these episodes:
- Foundational infrastructure, including physical, human, digital, and natural capital. This connects workers to job opportunities and firms to markets, laying the ground for output growth.
- A business-enabling environment, underpinned by macroeconomic stability, effective regulation, and strong institutions: this helps give firms and individuals the confidence to plan, invest, and create jobs.
- Mobilising private capital, which is essential to finance investment at scale, particularly where public resources are constrained.
These pillars are mutually reinforcing. Stronger infrastructure and institutions help attract investment. Deeper financial markets help improve the business environment for firms. Private investment can also support the provision of infrastructure and other public goods, further strengthening growth and employment.
Job creation is not the only employment-related policy issue for those concerned with economic progress and development. Other considerations, including productivity and wages, informality, and working conditions, are important ingredients for raising living standards. These must often be tackled in parallel with job creation and amid constrained resources.
Yet employment creation is central. Jobs support output and poverty reduction, underpin social stability, and can provide hope and dignity to individuals. Demographic dynamics mean that whether policymakers can create sufficient job opportunities, particularly in economies facing large increases in working-age populations, will be pivotal to continued development progress at the global level.
References
Cazzaniga, M, F Jaumotte, L Li, G Melina, A Panton, C Pizzinelli, E Rockall, and M Tavares (2024), "Gen-AI: artificial intelligence and the future of work," Unpublished manuscript.
Chrimes, T, M A Kose, and K Stamm (eds) (2026), "The global jobs challenge," World Bank.
ILOSTAT (database), "ILO modelled estimates database," International Labour Organization.
Kim, S, and C Z Qiang (2025), "Small AI, big impact: harnessing artificial intelligence for development," World Bank.
Kose, M A, S Kurlat, F Ohnsorge, and N Sugawara (2022), "A cross-country database of fiscal space," Journal of International Money and Finance, 128: 102682.
Kose, M A, and F Ohnsorge (eds) (2024), "Falling long-term growth prospects: Trends, expectations, and policies," World Bank.
Lam, D, and M Leibbrandt (2023), "Demographic challenges for global labor markets in the 21st century: Africa in a changing world," Unpublished manuscript.
United Nations (2024), "World population prospects 2024," Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
WDI (World Development Indicators) (database).
World Bank (2026), Global Economic Prospects.
