Sikh youth’s alleged custodial torture sparks political storm in Punjab
Opposition parties target Bhagwant Mann government after Mohanjit Singh alleges torture following detention for waving a black flag at CM’s Sangrur programme
The alleged custodial torture of a Sikh youth detained for waving a black flag near the venue of Chief Minister Bhagwant Mann’s programme in Sangrur has snowballed into a political storm, with the Opposition accusing the AAP government of police brutality and demanding action against those responsible.
Amid mounting criticism from the Opposition, Punjab Police transferred a DSP and attached three other officers, including an inspector, to police lines.
Rahul backs ‘tortured’ youth
On Saturday, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi spoke to the youth, Mohanjit Singh, and assured him of all support. Punjab Congress chief Amrinder Singh Raja Warring, who met Singh at a hospital in Sangrur, arranged the phone call with Rahul.
Also read | Raghav Chadha cries vendetta over voter roll deletion; AAP says don’t blame us
Rahul hailed Singh’s courage in standing up for the truth and conveying his message. He asked the Punjab Congress to ensure that Singh gets justice, Warring told reporters.
Singh, from Sheron village in Sangrur, alleged that police in the Sunam division tortured him after detaining him for waving a black flag from the rooftop of a house near the venue of Mann’s ‘Lok Milni’ programme on September 2. He claimed that he was raising slogans against the AAP government’s alleged failure to curb the drug menace.
However, the Sangrur police rejected Singh’s allegations, with SSP Ravjot Kaur Grewal saying that he was a criminal facing eight FIRs in serious offences.
Congress steps up attack
To express solidarity with Singh, Warring said, Congress workers, including those from the Youth Congress and the Mahila Congress, across the state will show black flags to CM Mann wherever he goes.
Warring likened Mann to Afghan emperor and invader Ahmad Shah Abdali. He said the CM should have shown grace and dignity and called Singh and asked him why he was protesting.
But instead Mann “unleashed the brute police force on the youth who was subjected to brutal third-degree torture in police custody and even given electric shocks”, Warring alleged.
Leader of Opposition Partap Singh Bajwa also met Singh in Sangrur. “What has happened to him is deeply disturbing and a shameful reminder of how easily basic human rights can be trampled upon under the @AAPPunjab,” said Bajwa in a post on X.
SAD, BJP target Punjab police
Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) president Sukhbir Singh Badal demanded immediate registration of a criminal case and dismissal of all police officers who, according to him, tortured and “religiously persecuted the Sikh youth”.
The SAD president, who visited Singh at the civil hospital, said he was shocked to learn that he had been subjected to electric shocks and blade cuts on his thighs, rubbing salt on his wounds, besides being beaten with slippers.
Also read | Punjab Congress crisis: Baghel holds meetings, assures 'everything will be fine'
Punjab BJP president Kewal Singh Dhillon too condemned the alleged police torture. He said he spoke to Singh over a video call and assured him every possible effort to ensure justice.
The BJP leader said he also spoke to the SSP Sangrur and the Punjab DGP regarding the matter and demanded an impartial investigation into the incident. Dhillon said the incident also raises serious questions over the claims made by the Punjab government regarding its “war against drugs” campaign.
(With agency inputs)
