Navy chief to visit Australia, New Zealand to strengthen maritime ties
Navy Chief will visit Australia and New Zealand from September 9 to strengthen naval cooperation, maritime security and interoperability.
The Chief of the Naval Staff Admiral Krishna Swaminathan will undertake an official visit to Australia and New Zealand starting September 9, aiming to bolster naval cooperation and strengthen maritime ties with the two countries.
During the visit, the Chief of the Naval Staff (CNS) will hold bilateral discussions with the senior leadership of the Royal Australian Navy (RAN) and the Royal New Zealand Navy (RNZN), officials said on Tuesday.
The visit is aimed at further strengthening the Indian Navy's bilateral cooperation with the two navies.
"The visit to Australia builds upon the growing momentum in India–Australia relations, following the third India-Australia Annual Summit held in July 2026 and the second India–Australia Defence Ministers' Dialogue held in June 2026," a senior official said.
The two countries have continued to "deepen cooperation" in defence and security, including maritime security and regional cooperation, they said.
During the visit, Admiral Swaminathan will hold bilateral discussions with the senior leadership of the RAN and engage with senior Australian defence leadership.
"The engagements will provide an opportunity to review ongoing naval cooperation and explore avenues for strengthening operational interaction, interoperability, information sharing, training and professional exchanges between the two navies," the official said.
The CNS will also visit key operational and training establishments and interact with personnel of the RAN.
The engagements will include discussions on maritime capabilities, emerging technologies and professional military education, reflecting the expanding scope of cooperation between the two navies.
The visit to New Zealand builds upon the renewed momentum in India–New Zealand relations, following the visit of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to New Zealand in July 2026, the official added.
During the visit, India and New Zealand elevated their bilateral relationship to a strategic partnership and agreed to deepen cooperation across several areas, including defence and maritime security.
In New Zealand, the CNS will hold discussions with the senior leadership of the RNZN and engage with senior New Zealand defence leadership.
The engagements will focus on further strengthening operational interaction, information sharing, training and professional exchanges between the two navies, the official said.
The CNS will also visit key operational and training establishments and interact with personnel of the Royal New Zealand Navy and officers undergoing professional military education.
The visit assumes significance in the backdrop of the recently concluded Maritime Cooperation Arrangement, which provides an expanded framework for practical maritime cooperation between India and New Zealand, the official said.
The visit underscores India's growing defence and maritime engagement with Australia and New Zealand and the commitment of the Indian Navy to further deepen cooperation with the Royal Australian Navy and Royal New Zealand Navy, through practical and sustained maritime engagement, contributing towards peace, security and stability in the Indo-Pacific, the official added.
