Subscribe to Multicore
Multicore is about technology hardware and design. It’s written from Tokyo by Sam Byford. To learn more, visit multicore.blog
SIGN UP
Samsung is known for experimenting in public. Even the giant 6-inch-plus smartphones we carry around today can be traced back to the 2011 release of the Galaxy Note, which started out as an effort to push the boundaries of screen size but ultimately got merged into the mainstream Galaxy lineup.
More recently, Samsung has pioneered foldable phones, seemingly without much consideration as to whether they’re ready for prime time. The original Galaxy Fold launched with obvious flaws like a tiny outer screen and questionable durability, while the first Galaxy Z Flip felt a little more mature without offering much functionality beyond the flashy clamshell design.
This year, Samsung is launching a new foldable form factor competing directly against an existing one, setting up a fascinating A/B test of which one the public will go for. It also happens to be taking place as Apple looms with its long-awaited entry into the space.
Confusingly, the truly new device is called simply the Galaxy Z Fold8, making it sound like a conventional entry in Samsung’s existing line of book-style foldables. Instead, that expected iterative update has been dubbed the Galaxy Z Fold8 Ultra, positioning it as a product explicitly aimed at power users.
That probably makes a degree of sense, considering who was buying these still-niche devices up until now. But the Z Fold8 is potentially a more mainstream proposition. It has a wider, squatter outer display—roughly the size and dimensions of a passport—and folds out into a landscape 4:3 orientation, as opposed to the square-ish inner screen on the Ultra.
This instantly makes the Z Fold8 more appealing for regular tablet use. In fact, the 7.6-inch inner screen is very close in size and shape to the iPad mini’s, back in the days when it still had a home button. Compared with the Ultra, you lose less of the screen to black bars when watching video, and many Android apps work a lot more naturally in portrait orientation than they do on a square screen. The Z Fold8 feels like a perfect phone for content consumption while still slipping easily into a pocket.
Conversely, the Ultra remains the better device for uses like multitasking. With an outer screen closer in dimensions to a regular smartphone, the key advantage of the inner screen is that it can run two full-size phone apps side by side. Samsung has also made space for a more capable camera system that includes a telephoto lens, albeit the same unimpressive 10-megapixel 3x module that’s been hanging around its phones for far too many years.
