Rivian spin-off ALSO is pushing back the delivery timeline for its highly anticipated TM-B electric bike yet again, with reservation holders for the flagship Launch Edition now being told to expect their bikes to arrive by early November at the latest.
In a new update sent to customers, ALSO says its Launch Edition bikes are “now shipping”, with deliveries expected to arrive “in waves between now and early November.”
Social media is astir with questions about what that “now shipping” label really means, with some asking if bikes have been delivered to real customers outside of influencers, family, friends, and others connected to the company.
The announcement follows the most recent delay last month, when the company had already pushed back deliveries to mid-September, i.e., a few days from now.
Now it sounds like this could be the ultimate delay – assuming the bikes do actually land in driveways during the next two months.
ALSO recently opened up regular orders to its reservation holders, but the company now says those bikes won’t begin shipping until after the Launch Edition units. Deliveries for reservation holders are expected to begin in early November and continue through the end of the year, depending on when the order was placed and which configuration was selected.
That appears to mark yet another slip in the TM-B’s delivery timeline.
ALSO says it will begin sending customers more specific timing updates throughout September and plans to update its online ordering system with delivery estimates based on individual bike configurations.
While the company hasn’t shared many details about the sources of the delays, they’ve attempted to assuage customers by sharing encouraging progress, including adding images to their website showing bikes already in production at the company’s Asian factory.
The TM-B is an unusual and ambitious e-bike, featuring the company’s proprietary DreamRide drivetrain, a large integrated display, modular accessories, and a design that blurs the line between conventional e-bike and electric moped.
The biggest headline feature is likely the drive-by-wire design, which replaces traditional direct linkage from the pedal cranks to the wheel with an electronic alternative comprised of a generator powered by the pedals and a motor nearby then that powers the rear wheel through a belt drive.
Those innovative and high-tech features have helped make the TM-B one of the more interesting new electric two-wheelers in years. But for reservation holders who have been waiting since last year, the wait just got a little longer.
As ALSO Chief Commercial Officer Ben Steele put it in the update, “I’m confident your TM-B will be worth the wait.”
