Slovenia-based GEN-I Sonce marked the start of construction in Romania of a 55 MW / 220 MWh battery energy storage system (BESS). Waldevar Energy is the contractor. The news came just days after Enery took over a ready-to-build project for 400 MW in operating power. Nova Power and Gas is preparing to launch works on a BESS of 200.6 MWh in capacity, which it would expand to 802.4 MWh.
Romania is making giant steps in the deployment of battery storage. It is trying to catch up with neighboring Bulgaria, which has surged to number one in Europe, but also the top of the global chart in some segments. The government in Bucharest is rolling out grant mechanisms and considering a range of stimulation measures, while major projects are advancing.
The latest update is that GEN-I Sonce marked the start of construction of the Gheorgheni battery energy storage system (BESS), which would have 55 MW in capability and 220 MWh in capacity. Early last week its signed an engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) deal with domestic contractor Waldevar Energy.
Waldevar first got the job for the substation, and then the turnkey contract for the battery system
The project is part of a strategy to develop energy infrastructure projects across Southeast Europe, GEN-I Sonce noted. It is a member of GEN-I Group, headquartered in Slovenia.
“Following our collaboration with GEN-I, d.o.o. on the Gheorgheni 110 kV, 63 MVA substation, we are now delivering a utility-scale storage project that strengthens our growing BESS portfolio in Europe,” Waldevar said. They signed the contract for the grid segment in late June.
Enery acquires project located in Romania’s emerging energy hub near Constanța
The news immediately followed Austria-based Enery’s takeover of a ready-to-build BESS project in Constanța county in southeastern Romania. Profit.ro reported that special purpose vehicle Complex Energy Systems initiated the endeavor two years ago.
The site is on five hectares in the commune of Crucea, an emerging energy hub together with neighboring Pantelimon.
The Austrian developer’s BESS would be connected to the grid via underground high-voltage power lines
Enery’s facility of 400 MW and 400 MWh, would comprise 80 container units in 20 groups with one converter each. The BESS is planned to be connected to the grid via 400 kV underground power lines.
The company is also building a subsidized 543 MW battery system as part of what is set to become the largest BESS-solar hybrid power plant in Europe. The Ogrezeni location is in Giurgiu county, near Bucharest. The facility should be completed by the end of next year.
Nova Power and Gas to start construction of 200.6 MWh of storage capacity
Nova Power and Gas, part of E-Infra, is about to obtain the final regulatory approval for the construction of the first part of a BESS of 802.4 MWh, the same media outlet learned.
According to the article, published earlier this week, the company was about to receive the so-called establishment authorization or setup authorization for 200.6 MWh in storage capacity. The entire project includes a photovoltaic park and a 220/20 kV transformer station.
It is located on the territory of the Valea Vinului commune near the borders with Ukraine and Hungary in the country’s northwest, in Satu Mare county.
The company operates Romania’s largest BESS and two others.
Hidroelectrica is among biggest investors in battery storage
State-owned hydropower giant Hidroelectrica is working on a range of battery storage projects.
For instance, the facility near the Retezat hydroelectric plant would have 90 MW and 360 MWh. The project at the Ruieni hydropower plant is for 50 MW in capability and 200 MWh of storage capacity. BESS Tudor Vladimirescu is envisaged with 30 MW and 120 MWh.
Repono and Gunvor Group are preparing to build a 202 MW / 404 MWh battery system
A few months ago, Swedish company Repono revealed it would conduct its 202 MW / 404 MWh project in partnership with Gunvor Group and in cooperation with Vienna-based company called enspired.
The site is in Argeș county. The partners expect the BESS to come online by mid-2027.
Visual Fan recently finished the installation of a 120 MWh battery storage system (BESS) for Teius Solar, controlled by Danish company Eurowind Energy. The contractor did the job through its Allview Energy branch. The BESS benefits from Romanian state support.
GEN-I is optimizer, trading partner for R.Power’s Scorniçesti BESS project
In late spring, R.Power has secured financing for its Scorniçesti standalone battery system, of 127 MW / 254 MWh. It is under construction in Olt county.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development provided EUR 44 million of the EUR 57 million. PKO Bank Polski and Polish development bank Bank Gospodarstwa Krajowego (BGK) covered the rest.
The project is co-owned by R.Power’s joint venture partner Eiffel Investment Group.
GEN-I is the exclusive commercial optimizer and trading partner for the Scorniçesti facility.
Transelectrica connects BESS of 77 MW / 150 MWh to high-voltage network
Of note, transmission system operator Transelectrica just revealed that, since the beginning of the year, it connected a combined 2.5 GW of production capacity and battery storage power to the high-voltage system.
The last facility was battery system IS Părău, of 76.76 MW and 150.288 MWh. BESS accounted for 663 MW in total, compared to 496 MW of wind power and 1.33 GW in photovoltaics. The share of biogas is 5 MW, while only 20 MW runs on fossil fuels.
Earlier, another milestone went under the radar, amid the current drought and energy crisis. The company said total electricity production capacity has surpassed 20 GW, reaching 20.2 GW by August 1.
Solar power amounts to 4.16 GW. Hydropower makes up 6.69 GW and wind power reached 3.29 GW.
