Oyo Nyimba, a Ugandan king of the traditional pre-colonial kingdom of Tooro, has died aged just 34, the prime minister of Tooro announced late on Thursday.
"It is with profound sadness and a heavy heart that I announce the passing of His Majesty Omukama of Tooro, King Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV," Tooro's regional leader Calvin Armstrong Rwomiire Akiiki said on social media.
What is the role of traditional monarchs in Uganda?
Uganda is a republic, ruled by a parliament and a nominally-elected head of state, longstanding President Yoweri Museveni, who's been in power since 1986.
But the country retains several traditional monarchies that still preside over their kingdoms as they were constituted in the pre-colonial period. Their power is largely symbolic but they wield considerable cultural and social influence.
Although they were banned after independence from British colonial rule in 1962 by a republican president who said he wanted to unify the nascent country, Museveni reinstated the traditional monarchs in 1993.
Oyo Nyimba was arguably the most recognizable among them, not least because of his unusual story, taking the throne at the age of just 3 in 1995.
What did officials say about Oyo Nyimba's death?
Regional leader Akiiki said that the king had died late on Thursday, without giving a cause of death. He said an official statement with further details, including the funeral and mourning arrangements, would follow later.
He called on the people of Tooro to "remain united, calm and prayerful during this difficult time."
Akiiki also issued one surprising claim about the unmarried young king, who since a very young age had been seen as perhaps Uganda's most eligible bachelor.
"The continuity of the Crown is assured," he said. "His Majesty leaves behind a Prince as heir, whose identity will be formally revealed at the appropriate time, in accordance with the traditions and customs of the Tooro kingdom."
Ugandan opposition leader Bobi Wine also issued condolences online.
Oyo Nyimba's death triggered an outpouring of grief online and widespread national coverage in Uganda.
Who was King Oyo Nyimba of Tooro?
Born on April 16, 1992, Oyo was the second-born child of the late Omukama Patrick David Matthew Kaboyo Olimi III and Queen Best Kemigisa Kaboyo, with two sisters.
He ascended to the throne of Tooro, an area in western Uganda near the border to Congo, in 1995 after his father's death.
His unusual status as a modern "boy king" led to considerable interest early in his reign, including from world leaders like former Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi, who repeatedly visited Tooro.
Oyo's mother was among his key advisers in his younger years, as was President Yoweri Museveni, who attended his coming-of-age 18th birthday party in 2010 in Fort Portal.
In 2025, the Guinness Book of World Records said he was still the youngest reigning monarch alive, its most recent renewal of the record.
He spent time in the UK at Winchester University to conclude his education. This time away from Uganda prompted a failed challenge to his position in 2015, when his cousin Prince David Kijanangoma declared himself the rightful king of Tooro, accusing Oyo of neglecting the region.
Oyo was known as a lover of sports, and a fan of London football club Arsenal. He took interest in causes including HIV prevention, environmental conservation, tourism and climate change, for instance when he embarked on a hiking expedition in the Rwenzori Mountains in 2022 to try to showcase Uganda's tourism potential and the risks of climate change.
Prior to the news of his death, a Ugandan government minister was quoted in local media as saying Oyo had been seriously ill and was seeking medical treatment in the US.
If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google, so you'll always see our verified news first.
Edited by: Rob Turner
