ONE Nuclear Energy has entered into a binding letter of intent (LOI) with a group of Louisiana landowners to secure site control for the development of Project Cayman, a power generation and data infrastructure project in Louisiana, US.
The proposed development features a 2.88GW natural gas-fired power plant, a 700MW/2.88GWh battery energy storage system (BESS), and a high-capacity data centre campus.
Discover B2B Marketing That Performs
Combine business intelligence and editorial excellence to reach engaged professionals across 36 leading media platforms.
Project Cayman is located near the RiverPlex MegaPark in Louisiana, close to SpaceX’s recently announced expansion in the region.
The site was chosen to complement ongoing economic development in the area, including recent investments from other industrial players and new transmission infrastructure from Entergy.
ONE Nuclear CEO Richard Taylor said: “Project Cayman, with its 2.88GW power capacity, demonstrates that ONE Nuclear is committed to supporting the future economic development of one of Louisiana’s most important industrial regions.
“The project will deliver the reliable energy needed to support new investment, create jobs, expand the local tax base and generate additional funding for community priorities and critical infrastructure.”
The project aims to deliver energy storage, dispatchable generation and technology infrastructure to strengthen regional grid reliability, especially as the region faces a surge in new industrial and technology-driven electricity demand.
Community engagement activities have already begun, with a series of public information meetings planned involving local parishes, government agencies and other stakeholders. These sessions are scheduled to run from September through December 2026.
The company described the LOI as a key step towards developing “reliable, scalable and technology-ready energy infrastructure” to address increased power needs for industry and data-driven businesses in Louisiana and beyond.
Taylor said: “ONE Nuclear is proud to invest in the region to support the rapidly growing energy needs created by other recently announced developments such as the SpaceX Starbase project and Hyundai’s $5.8bn steel mill.”
In June 2026, ONE Nuclear signed a LOI with Sunshine Partners US to consider joint development of power projects across five sites totalling about 18,275 acres in West Texas.
This group of properties, referred to as the “West Texas Platform”, covers five counties within the ERCOT West market.
