Norwegian company Scatec has obtained financing for its 77 MW wind farm project in Romania from Banca Comercială Română (BCR) and its owner – Erste Group. The facility is under construction in Urleasca, northeast of Bucharest. BCR earlier approved a loan for a joint venture of OMV Petrom and Renovatio, for a future wind park.
Banca Comercială Română and Erste Group said they provided EUR 132 million in financing for Scatec’s 77 MW wind farm in Romania. The Urleasca project is supported by a contract for difference (CfD) covering 57% of expected production, at EUR 71.3 per MWh. The remainder would be sold on the Romanian wholesale power market, the announcement reads.
The facility northeast of Bucharest has just entered the construction phase. Urleasca is a village in Traian commune, in the vicinity of the city of Brăila. Notably, there is another wind park near the site.
“Urleasca is an important milestone for our growth in Romania. With multiple renewable projects now under construction, we are building scale in a market with strong fundamentals and significant potential. This gives us a solid foundation to capture opportunities across technologies and offtake structures,” said Scatec’s Country Manager Alex Patrascu.
Equinor is the Norway-based company’s largest shareholder. Urleasca is Scatec’s first onshore wind project in Europe.
BCR is financing Scatec’s two solar power projects as well
BCR, Erste Group’s subsidiary, participates with EUR 76 million. It is its second financing for the same company. It earlier approved EUR 42.5 million for the Dobrun and Sadova solar power portfolio in Dolj and Olt counties, totaling 190 MW. Both photovoltaic systems are under construction.
In the first half of 2026, the bank provided EUR 450 million in financing to the energy sector, of which more than EUR 362 million went to renewable energy projects.
Wind farms made up EUR 288 million, compared to EUR 41 million for solar power and EUR 33 million for battery energy storage systems, BESS.
OX2 remained on board as CATA contractor
Urleasca costs EUR 168 million excluding value-added tax, Scatec revealed earlier. It is financed through a combination of non-recourse project debt and equity, with a leverage of 60%.
Scatec holds 100% of the project, which it bought from OX2 a month ago. The Sweden-based company remained on board under a construction and asset transfer agreement (CATA). Scatec will provide operations and maintenance and management services. Commissioning is targeted for the second half of 2028.
The wind farm in Brăila county will be equipped with 11 Nordex N175/6.X turbines.
BCR earlier agreed to finance Gura Văii wind power project
BCR recently approved a EUR 47 million loan for wind farm Gura Văii, also known as CEE Onești. It is owned by OMV Petrom and Renovatio, via their joint venture Electrocentrale Borzești, of 50% each.
The planned capacity is 49.8 MW. Gura Văii is in Bacău county. It is one of the three projects of 305 MW altogether for which OMV Petrom reached the final investment decision in April.
Annual net electricity production is estimated at 110 GWh. Part of the output would be sold through a long-term purchase agreement (PPA), concluded for 10 years with Renovatio Trading.
