Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription, on Patreon, or on Stripe. Help us produce all of the high-quality, original content we publish week after week despite the challenges of content-scraping AI, antisocial media, inflation, and other hurdles.
There’s almost dead silence on the US market when it comes to electric vehicles (EVs). Republicans in Congress and the White House abandoned almost all support for EVs when they took power, and automakers quickly took the opportunity to shut down big EV programs, end production of various EV models, and basically just avoid the topic. Ford dropped the F-150 Lightning, for example. However, rather than abandoning EVs completely, Ford apparently got serious about trying to truly compete in this fast-developing market and is working on its big “Universal EV” project to do so.
“Normally, Ford’s 3-million-square-foot Louisville Assembly Plant (LAP) is defined by the steady drum of thousands of people assembling vehicles. But one year ago, Ford announced the plant would be completely transformed — going from a gas-powered vehicle facility to a fully electric vehicle plant — to assemble the new midsize electric truck, the Ford Fathom,” Ford recently wrote. “So, in late 2025, the massive space went silent for a $2 billion overhaul. Over the course of several weeks, crews physically unbolted and hauled out heavy machinery and dragged thousands of tons of steel out the doors. By February 2026, only the empty shell of LAP remained.”
That’s right — the facility was emptied out by February. So, what’s been happening there since then? What’s been happening is further developing and installing the Universal EV Production System. “Since this past winter, Ford’s work in LAP has moved at breakneck speed, radically simplifying the assembly process that takes center stage in Louisville. As the vision turns to reality on the plant floor, teams are on track to begin Fathom prototype builds with production qualified parts in the first quarter of 2027.” Customer deliveries of the electric truck — which will be a breakthrough vehicle if Ford has its way — are supposed to begin in 2027.
Ford includes a long section of videos and side notes on this page to teach people more about the project. Here are just a few screenshots of that:
There’s also a video here:
“The three main sections of the body marry together only when the bulk of components are already installed. This is possible, in part, thanks to the use of large unicastings where a single large aluminum casting replaces what was once dozens of individually stamped and welded pieces to help form two of the main sections of the vehicle (front and rear).” Sound familiar?
“Because each unicasting is structurally whole on its own, it doesn’t need to be welded into a complete body shell before work can begin inside. In the third line of the UEV Production System, the interior components are installed on top of the battery, which serves as the vehicle’s floor. The battery itself is then installed into the vehicle from the bottom.”
The new system, brought to the industry by Tesla, is supposed to cut down on unnecessary portions of the manufacturing processes “We’ve engineered an 84% reduction in reaching over the fender,” said Bryce Currie, Ford chief manufacturing officer. “The wiring harness is also more than 4,000 feet shorter and 22 pounds lighter than in our first-gen electric SUV, making it much easier to install.”
Ford was inspired by Chinese automakers and EV options on the Chinese market, where the highest tech EVs come at the most shockingly competitive prices.
“Kevin Young, advanced program manufacturing chief for Ford, said that creating space around the actual assembly allows Ford to increase operators per workstation, and parts can now start in the vehicle, not off to the side. The design features increased assembly density and a reduced line length,” Ford adds. “It is simply foundationally different from how we have done things before,” Young noted. “Operators can see everything in front of them and don’t need to bend or reach to do it.”
There’s also a strong focus on ergonomics with the coming Ford Fathom. We’ll have to wait until 2027 to find out what that really means and how good the Fathom is.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
