State-owned power utility Elektroprivreda Srbije is seeking to acquire or co-develop renewable energy projects, following similar moves by regional peers.
Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS) has issued a public call to interested companies and investors, offering to acquire or co-develop renewable energy projects.
EPS Chief Executive Officer Dušan Živković stressed that the objective is to diversify the company’s portfolio through a transparent and competitive process.
Živković: Opening the door to the best projects and partners in the market
The company aims to spearhead the energy transition while maintaining security of supply, he noted.
“We are opening our doors to the market’s best projects and partners to accelerate renewable energy investments and build a stable, sustainable energy system for the future. Crucially, we can repurpose EPS’ existing infrastructure for new energy projects, speeding up their execution,” Živković said.
The public call is open to legal entities.
Similar steps have previously been taken by Croatia’s Hrvatska Elektroprivreda (HEP) and two companies from Bosnia and Herzegovina – Elektroprivreda BiH (EPBiH) and Elektroprivreda Republike Srpske (ERS).
Projects are divided into two categories
Projects are divided into two categories. The first comprises solar, wind, and hybrid projects with an installed capacity of at least 50 MW, connected to the transmission grid. For photovoltaic and wind projects, battery energy storage systems (BESS) are not mandatory but will add extra weight in the evaluation, EPS explained.
For these projects, EPS will select potential acquisition targets through a competitive procedure, it added.
For the first group of projects, procurement will be conducted as a two-phase competitive process
EPS intends to acquire these projects structured as acquisition targets that meet the criteria specified in the tender documentation, which can be downloaded from the portal [link] according to the call for expressions of interest.
The procedure for these projects will follow a two-phase competitive process in line with the specified tender requirements.
Bidders must submit required details to oie.akvizicije@eps.rs before downloading the documentation. The submission methods and deadlines for these projects are specified in the tender file.
Category 2 includes green hydrogen projects
The second category covers projects utilizing biomass, municipal, industrial, or organic waste for electricity or heat generation, including waste-to-energy facilities, biogas, and landfill gas utilization, as well as green hydrogen projects.
EPS said it would offer partners existing sites and infrastructure, including the locations of the Morava and Kolubara A thermal power plants, to jointly develop new energy projects.
Letters of intent are to be submitted within 30 days
EPS invites interested parties to submit letters of intent for these projects within 30 days of issuing the public call.
Based on the interest, EPS will subsequently issue detailed documentation for the project acquisition procedure or cancel the tender, notifying all bidders within a maximum of 60 days, according to the call.
Based on the details provided in the letters of intent, the company will also notify shortlisted bidders within 60 days to submit further project information.
