Follow ZDNET: Add us as a preferred source on Google
ZDNET’s key takeaways
- The latest Windows 11 update creates a glitch with the mouse cursor.
- Any personalized settings for the mouse cursor are wiped out or reset.
- The only option for now is to uninstall the update.
Windows 11 users who installed the September preview update are running into a bug that impacts the mouse. Released on August 27, the update is wiping out or modifying the personalized settings that people have set up for their mouse cursor. As a result, the cursor may appear too large or too small or might not show up at all.
On its Windows 11 known issues and notifications page, Microsoft described the problem, reporting that the mouse cursor personalization settings are changed or reverted to standard settings after the August 27 Windows update (KB5120998) is installed. The description of the issue is based on reports the company has received from Windows users.
“The issue is described as resulting in appearance regressions and intermittent animation changes,” Microsoft said. “Some reports mention that high-DPI mouse cursors are replaced with larger, white cursors, and custom cursor animations reverting to standard settings. Attempts to restore the previous cursor customization are reported to be unsuccessful.”
The problematic update is of the preview type. That means it’s not a mandatory one, as are the monthly Patch Tuesday rollouts. Instead, it’s an optional update that you manually trigger if you wish. But it still appears in Windows Update as ready for download and installation, so it’s easy enough to run.
As a preview of the September Patch Tuesday update, this one also contains a few major changes to Windows 11, including a resizable Start menu, a movable taskbar, and a cleaner Search window. As such, it’s an update with some much desired and long-awaited enhancements.
The mouse cursor glitch may not be the only one hitting some users. The update is also resetting the Windows wallpaper to a black screen and causing the font to look blurry on certain systems, according to Windows Latest. The wallpaper complaints are being reported by users in Microsoft’s Feedback Hub. The font issue doesn’t seem to be as widespread as the other two, Windows Latest noted, and Microsoft has yet to acknowledge this one.
The company said it’s currently investigating the mouse cursor problem to determine whether it’s caused by the update and promised to provide more information when available. Since this update is a preview of the September Patch Tuesday one, Microsoft has until September 8 to fix all the glitches.
For now, the only way to resolve this is to uninstall the troublesome update. To do that, go to Settings, select Windows Update. Scroll down the screen and click Update History. Scroll down the History screen and select the “Uninstall updates” option. Look for the update labeled “2026-08 Preview Update (KB5120998) (26200.9278).” Click its Uninstall link and then confirm that you want to uninstall it.
