Romanian hydropower company Hidroelectrica has selected a contractor for a battery energy storage system (BESS) at the Iron Gates II hydropower plant, taking a major step towards installing its second BESS.
Hidroelectrica is investing RON 296.8 million (EUR 56.5 million) in the new BESS, which will be installed at its Iron Gates II (Porțile de Fier II) hydropower plant.
The BESS will have an installed capacity of 64 MW and a storage capacity of 434.76 MWh, Hidroelectrica said.
The facility will become the largest battery energy storage asset in the company’s portfolio, it added.
Synergy Construct will install the battery together with subcontractors
Bucharest-based Synergy Construct will install the battery with subcontractors Kseo Enerji, Professional Land Survey, Zoork, Tripol Sistem Construct, Inemko Insaat Elektrik Telekominikasyon Sanayi Ve Ticaret, and Rogotehnic.
“The energy transition means building the infrastructure that enables us to efficiently harness renewable energy and respond flexibly to the needs of the national power system,” said Hidroelectrica CEO Iulius-Dan Plaveti.
The investment represents a key milestone in Hidroelectrica’s development strategy
The Iron Gates II BESS project is a strategic step in this direction and confirms Hidroelectrica’s commitment to investing in technologies that will define tomorrow’s energy, he added.
According to the company, the investment marks a key milestone in its development strategy, supporting a shift toward an energy model in which renewable generation is complemented by the ability to store, manage, and dispatch power based on system dynamics and consumer demand.
Ambitious plans for battery energy storage
Hidroelectrica, which operates 6,300 MW of hydropower capacity, has ambitious plans for battery energy storage.
In late 2025, former CEO Bogdan Nicolae Badea said the state-owned power utility would install batteries at all its run-of-river HPPs to enable it to store surplus electricity and use it during the evening peak.
The company is about to commission its first BESS, co-located with its only wind park, Crucea Nord. At the same time, it is working on designs for battery facilities totaling 200 MW and 800 MWh on the lower course of the Olt River.
