John Iliffe, the distinguished scholar renowned for his life’s work in African history, died on 20 August 2026 at the age of 87.
He shed light on big themes in Africa’s history. His 12 books were scrupulously researched, many of them being pioneering works that set out new areas of scholarship. He taught hundreds of undergraduates in Tanzania, Malawi and the UK over a career that lasted over 40 years. He trained over two dozen doctoral students, many of whom now occupy positions of importance in African and British universities.
The young Iliffe did his PhD at Peterhouse College, Cambridge. He wrote about the early 20th century governor of German East Africa, Albrecht von Rechenberg, whose policies had pushed the local population toward rebellion. His dissertation came in at 1,046 pages (Cambridge’s history faculty was later to cap dissertations at 80,000 words).
In 1965 Iliffe went to Tanzania, where he took up a lectureship in the history department at the University College of Dar es Salaam. It was a heady time. Tanzania had just been born out of the union of two territories – Tanganyika and Zanzibar. President Julius Nyerere was looking for cultural and historical properties that could unify the nation. Dar es Salaam was hosting an astonishing range of liberation movements.
Iliffe and his colleagues were part of what came to be called the “Dar es Salaam School of African History”. They responded to the cadence of the age by authoring works that affirmed resistance against colonial rule.
Iliffe and his colleague Gilbert Gwassa were the coordinators of the Maji Maji research project. This involved sending students to southern Tanzania to interview elderly men and women who had taken part in that anti-colonial war.
Within two years, Iliffe published an important article about the interethnic organisation of the Maji Maji rebellion. The research helped make the rebellion a foundation for Tanzanian identity, an inspiration for a generation of artists and nation-builders.
The National Archives of Tanzania opened for scholarly use in the year that Iliffe took up his post. He seems to have read through every file. Users of the Tanzanian archives must sign the first page when they read a file, and today, researchers invariably find Iliffe’s characteristic signature there, first on the list.
African political actors at the centre of the story
In 1971, Iliffe left Dar es Salaam to lecture at Cambridge. He was elected a fellow of St John’s College, where he spent the next 55 years.
From Cambridge he wrote up his voluminous notes from the Tanzanian archives and published his Modern History of Tanganyika, which came out in 1979. It was and remains the best work of national history concerning any African country.
In 616 pages, Iliffe chronicled the economy and politics from 1800 to the 1950s. Commercial and educational opportunity drew people into larger, more cosmopolitan circles, creating linguistic, financial and political infrastructures that nationalists could build upon.
In Modern History, as in all his works, Iliffe insisted on putting African political actors at the centre of the story. At a time when nationalists had come to regard tribalism as an impediment to unity, Iliffe chronicled the political work that African activists had done to create and foster ethnic solidarity. In his memorable formulation about colonial governance:
Europeans believed Africans belonged to tribes; Africans built tribes to belong to. (page 324)
In the years that followed Modern History, Iliffe published on a great range of subjects. His books included:
The African Poor, published in 1987. The book showed how poor people struggled to uphold their dignity and their humanity in the face of other people’s condescension.
East African Doctors, which came out in 1998. The book brought into view the infrastructures that incubated the medical profession in eastern Africa, and chronicled the public health disasters that set the stage for Aids in the 1980s.
Honour in African History, which came out in 2004. It is my favourite among his books. Iliffe argued that, across the continent, and across historical time, Africans (like most of us) acted to secure the respect of their contemporaries. The book chronicled the changing nature of Africans’ ideas about honour. He helped us see the motivations that structure political behaviour.
Africans: the History of a Continent, which came out first in 1995 and has gone through several editions. It is the best textbook on Africa’s past. In a place where soil is thin, water is scarce and agronomy is difficult, the struggle to build up human population was the basic civilizational achievement. Iliffe’s magisterial book managed to explain the nature of Africa’s religious traditions and its political history by putting demography at the core of the continent’s history.
The opposite of an influencer
I met Iliffe in the last months of 2004. I was newly appointed to a lectureship in what was then called “extra-European history” at the University of Cambridge. He interviewed me for the job.
I spent the summer of 2004 corresponding with him about Paper 25: Africa Since 1800, for which I was to give a course of lectures. Iliffe did not use email, so our dialogue had to be conducted through postal mail. Once the teaching year began it became clear that I had much to learn. His lectures were clearly laid out, compellingly delivered and guided by a core argument: that population history could explain political, social and religious behaviour.
Iliffe was famously reclusive, the opposite of an “influencer”. All of his book manuscripts were typed out on an old typewriter he kept at hand. I never saw him at an academic conference. Among the small circle of Cambridge Africa scholars, though, he was a generous and warm host.
The questions he asked of graduate students and visiting colleagues were always about evidence and interpretation. They were never about theory. His approach to scholarship was documentary, not given to theoretical abstraction.
When a student or a colleague visited his rooms to discuss their work, he would disappear into his back rooms to emerge a few minutes later with a handful of cards. His notes were always concise, gilded with well-chosen quotations drawn from the documents he’d read through.
His passing brings an era to a close.
The nation-building project that drove him at the start of his early career has now run out of steam. So too has magisterial thematic history gone out of fashion. It is not that scholars of today lack ambition. It is that the register in which he wrote seems closed to us.
Iliffe’s thorough acquaintance with archival materials grew out of years-long immersion in collections that are hard to use. Few of us today have the personal discipline and the financial wherewithal to sustain months or years in the lonely work of reading through archives. The itinerary his career followed – back and forth between African and European universities – is scarcely possible now as salaries available in most African institutions have dramatically declined. And few of us possess the monastic habits that were at the core of his scholarly life.
His death is for me a cause of sorrow. For all of us, it is a good time to remember what disciplined, clear-minded research can yield: insights into the forces that shape and constrain human life; guidance into animating principles of our social world.
