Mitsubishi Electric has signed an agreement to acquire PCI Energy Solutions, a US-based provider of enterprise software for energy management and optimisation, in a transaction valued at $1.4bn (Y222bn).
The agreement will see Mitsubishi Electric obtain all equity interests in PCI Energy Solutions. The deal is expected to close in 2026, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary conditions.
Discover B2B Marketing That Performs
Combine business intelligence and editorial excellence to reach engaged professionals across 36 leading media platforms.
Once completed, PCI Energy Solutions will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Mitsubishi Electric.
PCI Energy Solutions develops software platforms that support power trading, generation and transmission operations, risk management, supply-demand planning and settlement services.
The company serves a range of power sector clients including utilities, public power entities, independent power producers and other wholesale market participants, primarily across North America.
According to Mitsubishi Electric, approximately 60% of US power generation is managed by PCI Energy Solutions’ platform, and the latter has a significant software-as-a-service recurring-revenue business and broad customer base.
Mitsubishi Electric cited increased complexity in power system operations and electricity markets as driving demand for advanced energy management solutions. This complexity is attributed to the growth of renewable energy, the spread of distributed energy resources and rising electricity demand.
The company’s current corporate strategy, announced in May 2026, identifies ‘Smart Energy’ as a priority area.
Mitsubishi Electric energy and industrial systems group president, executive officer (associate) Soichi Hamamoto said: “PCI has built an exceptional business with trusted technology, deep market expertise, strong customer relationships and an experienced management team.
“Our objective is to build on PCI’s strengths while creating additional capacity for long-term innovation and global growth, as we further strengthen our smart energy area in response to customer needs shifting from equipment-level energy savings towards the optimisation of total energy use through integrated demand-side management and market-based power trading.”
Until the transaction closes, PCI Energy Solutions and Mitsubishi Electric will continue to operate separately.
Both companies confirmed that customer support, service commitments and employee roles will remain unchanged for the time being.
PCI Energy Solutions founder and CEO Fred Lee said: “This transaction is a powerful validation of the company our employees have built and the trust our customers and partners placed in us for more than 30 years.
“Mitsubishi Electric intends to retain our core management team and provide a long-term platform for PCI to continue growing and excelling. We will remain focused on delivering our commitments, advancing our product road map and supporting customers for the long term.”
