Follow ZDNET: Add us as a preferred source on Google.
The Blink Battery Doorbell 2K+ is bundled with a Blink Outdoor 2K+ camera and a Sync Module Core for only $100, a 41% discount that is available for a limited time. The Battery Doorbell 2K+ alone is typically priced at $70, while a single Blink Outdoor 2K+ costs $100, so you save $70 with this deal, effectively getting a battery-powered video doorbell for free.
As a home security camera, the Blink Outdoor 2K+ is a wireless device that can last up to two years before needing a battery replacement. The camera is powered by two AA lithium batteries; no solar panels or wires are required, so you can place it wherever you want.
The camera’s 2K resolution delivers sharp images, and its easy installation means you can get clear pictures of activity around your property, whether that’s a house, a business, or a rental. The versatility is my favorite thing about the Outdoor 2K+ because I love that I can use this camera to monitor my home security, know when visitors come and go, see what my dog gets up to when he goes outside, and even keep an eye on the wildlife around my house.
The Blink Battery Doorbell 2K+ mirrors the Outdoor camera’s versatility in a video doorbell form factor. This device is powered by three lithium AA batteries and offers months of battery life. Compared to the older model, the new Blink Doorbell 2K+ features higher resolution, a head-to-toe view, and enhanced audio for clearer two-way talk sessions.
The doorbell also offers person detection, letting you skip other alerts altogether and reduce pesky notifications and false alarms.
The bundle includes a Sync Module Core, a plug-in bridge for your Blink system that goes inside your home. You can connect up to 10 Blink cameras with a single Module, which uses low-power connectivity to connect, saving your devices’ batteries.
How I rated this deal
The 41% discount on the Blink Outdoor 2K+ and Blink Battery Doorbell 2K+ brings the price of both down to only $100. This bundle’s original price is around $170, and it goes on sale every now and then for around $130, so a $100 price makes this a great time to buy. We’ve only seen this price drop lower once, when it went to $55 for a few days earlier this summer.
When will this deal expire?
While many sales events feature deals for a specific period, limited-time deals are subject to expiration at any time. ZDNET remains committed to finding, sharing, and updating the best offers to help you maximize your savings so you can feel as confident in your purchases as we are in our recommendations. Our ZDNET team of experts constantly monitors the deals we feature to keep our stories up-to-date. If you missed out on this deal, don’t worry — we’re continually sourcing new savings opportunities at ZDNET.com.
How do we rate deals at ZDNET?
We aim to deliver the most accurate advice to help you shop smarter. ZDNET offers 33 years of experience, 30 hands-on product reviewers, and 10,000 square feet of lab space to ensure we bring you the best of tech.
In 2025, we refined our approach to deals, developing a measurable system for sharing savings with readers like you. Our editor’s deal rating badges are affixed to most of our deal content, making it easy to interpret our expertise to help you make the best purchase decision.
At the core of this approach is a percentage-off-based system to classify savings offered on top-tech products, combined with a sliding-scale system based on our team members’ expertise and several factors like frequency, brand or product recognition, and more. The result? Hand-crafted deals chosen specifically for ZDNET readers like you, fully backed by our experts.
