The following article originally appeared on Medium and is being republished here with the author’s permission.
Everybody’s talking about the death of developers. I get it. The developer whose job was to write boilerplate or scaffold CRUD apps is done—a model can do that in seconds, and that developer is not coming back. But the people announcing the end of programming are missing something. There’s a new job title that’s starting to emerge across several areas in software.
Architects and developers are becoming orchestrators—one person directing work that once required entire teams. This shift will reach far beyond software, but software engineering is where I’ve seen it firsthand.
An orchestrator knows how to develop software, but their job isn’t to write the code anymore—it’s to oversee a system, orchestrate tools and agents, and generate components into something that has to work in production. But the most important distinction between an “orchestrator” and a “software developer” is that an orchestrator focuses less on delivering software and more on orchestrating the systems that can both operate and develop software.
The technical expertise that used to be applied to figuring out the structure of a database schema or an object model will now be applied to guiding a set of subsystems that have taken responsibility for most tactical, line-level decisions. Where a “developer” in 2023 focused on deciding how a React application might store state, an “orchestrator” in 2027 is focused on a DESIGN.md file that sets standards for a subsystem that is responsible for fusing analytics data with input from customer feedback to recommend, test, and implement site changes as part of a large, more autonomous approach to running a business.
Orchestrating systems of delegated intelligence
While everyone is calling everything “agents” these days, I’m also going to put forward an idea. An orchestrator can and will use systems that resemble some of the more “agentic” approaches we’re all using today, from systems like Hermes, OpenClaw, or every other system that has started to call itself an “agent.” I’m starting to see that the term is overused. Taking a step back from the technology we’re using today, I’m going to suggest that the job of an “orchestrator” is to coordinate systems that fall under a new category called “delegated intelligence.”
We’ve been calling everything “artificial intelligence” for several decades. That term, mixed with “Generative AI” and “Inference Engines,” fails to capture what we’re starting to see in practice. An agentic system that has memory and can start to operate with a level of independence is exhibiting “delegated intelligence,” and the word “delegated” is doing a lot of work. It implies that systems in this category will always be traceable back to an accountable operator, or, in this case, an Orchestrator.
Fundamental to the shift toward Orchestrators is a combination of automation, productivity, and accountability. As organizations, companies, and governments start to make use of delegated intelligence to support a more autonomous approach to design, operation, and engineering, there will be an increasing need to establish accountability. If your business operates critical infrastructure on a set of autonomous agents, one of the questions that will become necessary to answer in the case of an outage is “on whose authority was this delegated intelligence operating?”
An ecosystem of orchestrators: Generalists and specialists
There are orchestrators, and then there are technical specialists. A move towards generalist expertise marks orchestrators, because the capability of a specialist is now found mostly in a model. You’ll still need a couple of specialists, but not one for every technology—and even some of those specialists will be specialist orchestrators. It’s going to get complicated.
You’ll be looking for generalist orchestrators who understand the whole thing end to end. You could think of an orchestrator as an expert Renaissance programmer—usually people with a couple of decades of experience who understand the end-to-end life cycle of software development. Those are the individuals becoming orchestrators, and it’s changing the whole makeup of IT departments. We’re no longer programmers.
. . .
Let me use my own experience here to capture what the new reality looks like. I recently had to add DRM to a series of audiobooks I’m self-publishing—an inaudible watermark encoding order-specific data into the audio file, so that if I find one of these files in the wild, I can identify who bought it. I’m not a subject matter expert in overlaying audio watermarks, but I do understand how to write code that processes sound files.
Orchestration: From months to minutes
This particular task would have taken me weeks or months, and not long ago I would have started the project by creating a git repository and opening up an IDE. That’s not how it works in 2026.
When I orchestrated the creation of this system two weeks ago, it took 20 minutes, and the tools gave me three dimensions of highly encrypted watermarking and fingerprinting—essentially the work product of 3 steganographic audio specialists.
Okay, I lied—it was 40 minutes. The first 20 minutes I was asking the models to come up with 5 different approaches so I could choose the right one. But I want to emphasize that I asked the system to produce 5 different proposals and then model the long-term cost and operability of each option. I also gave it direction to think about customer experience, create a matrix of pros and cons for each option, and end with a recommendation.
This was all done by a system that has been tracking content development for several months, and it used customer knowledge, analytics, and product design to inform the set of options it was giving its Orchestrator before jumping into implementation.
Your job isn’t code, it’s orchestration
Part of my job now is to leverage these tools not just to create, but during ideation, product design, and quality engineering. The Orchestrator is there because that person knows what questions to ask. It would have taken me three months and a large team to get this done only four years ago, and I shipped it without reading every line.
To be frank, it’s a weird space to be in, and the “me” from three years ago would have been really uncomfortable hearing that I implemented something but didn’t write the code myself. In fact, my initial reaction to Steve Yegge saying that he should stop reading his code was very negative, and I still have some reservations about that belief, but I will say that in my own practice, I’m starting to not read my code—because it’s not my code.
Like a lot of programmers reading this, I’ve had to go through an identity moment as a programmer—becoming comfortable with shipping something to production I might not have read every line of. There’s maybe a hundred thousand lines of code—too much to read—and honestly, it’s not my job anymore. I’m an orchestrator, and it would be highly inefficient if I tried to keep up.
I’m not a vibe-coder, and I’m not a “citizen developer”—a term I hate enough to curse at because it’s just the wrong word. I’m someone who could write the code, but I’ve decided to delegate that task to a system that has more information at hand than I could ever hope to assemble. And while these systems, the delegated intelligence tools like an agent, can implement systems in mere minutes, they still need a human to weigh in on direction. And I would argue that we still need a human to remain present and accountable.
The Orchestrator knows enough to understand what was done for them and how to dig into the details when something breaks. They know how to debug, they have a sense of what’s valid and what’s not, and they’re honest about what they know and what they don’t.
Orchestrators as finishers
Here’s the controversial part. This is absolutely not about “democratizing access to technology.” There’s a myth that anyone can pick up these tools and code, and that is true—yes, anyone can code, but not everyone can deliver it to production in a scalable and secure manner.
A colleague of mine recently wrote that it’s easy to start projects with generative AI, but what’s difficult is finishing them. It takes the same effort, energy, and technical expertise to deliver something to production as it always has.
The idea that anyone and their brother can pick up a generative AI tool and create technical perfection—that myth is about to expire. If you build a complicated, technical system without an individual responsible for orchestrating the creation and operation of that system, there will come a day when you have to pay someone to do that for you, and that someone is going to charge you a lot.
Orchestrators plan for contingencies: Ability to support
That DRM system I just talked about—I haven’t read every line, but before I shipped it, I made sure that I understood the baseline for support going forward. While I delegated authority to an agent to create it, I also made sure to ask that same agent to capture code locations, architecture, approach, and to generate a system of documents that could be used to debug and support it if AI was unavailable.
Have I read this “pilot manual” from start to finish before deploying this to production? No. But I understand where the throttle gauge is, and if I needed to land this plane without autopilot, I could. This is one of the responsibilities of the new role. Planning for “offline,” thinking through contingencies.
The key point is that I’m qualified enough to understand the pilot manual that AI wrote for me in case I need to debug it, and if AI were to disappear tomorrow, I could rebuild it myself. That is not true for many people introducing themselves to coding through AI, and it creates a dependence on the tools that needs to be managed—one of the ways it will be managed is through certified orchestrators who can create but also support systems without the tools, especially in regulated and critical areas.
Adapting the organization to the emerging role
Things are changing fast—one Orchestrator equals 20 or 30 developers, plus teams of QA engineers. While we’re still going to need product people and people who think about the customer, the technical work is consolidating around the person directing it.
And before you ask—why not just call this an architect? Because architect never worked. If you’ve worked in a company that has architects, you’ll understand that while a few architects continue to keep up-to-date with technology, many also tend to lean back on past experience delegating day-to-day technology to junior engineers. This role differs from that of an architect because it calls for someone to be engaged with specifications, outcomes, and operations.
Orchestrator isn’t the incommunicative programmer that stares at an IDE all day; they are the individual that understands the full, end-to-end flow not just of data in a technical system but how the business operates and adapts autonomously. They are technical, but they are also focused on providing oversight, and they are the individual responsible for deciding what intelligence can be delegated.
So how do we create orchestrators? Not from a bootcamp or a six-week certificate. This is going to take an apprentice program—years of it, the same way we create doctors and lawyers. You work under someone who knows what to pay attention to, and you learn by watching them make decisions.
These are employees who can do real damage, and they’re a walking liability. When a corporation buys insurance for people writing code, that’s one set of risks. When you’re insuring professionals who are a hundred times more productive, they also carry a hundred times more responsibility. Insurance rates, regulations, and certification requirements are all going to go up. Doctors carry malpractice insurance because their decisions affect people’s lives.
A Professional Engineer has to be licensed because engineering affects public safety. Orchestrators are headed the same direction.
If you fast-forward 20 or 30 years, what we call programmers now are going to be orchestrators, and they’re going to look more like doctors and lawyers than like this band of people we have now who write code.
Code will be part of the job, but not the majority of it.
