If you're on a Galaxy Fold, consider unfolding your phone or viewing it in full screen to best optimize your experience.
When the Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card (rates and fees) hit the market, it quickly stood out among our experts as one of the best all-around, no-annual-fee credit cards. It now holds our Best Credit Card for 2026 title for its reliable 2% cash rewards and everyday value.
It’s easy to see why with these perks:
APPLY NOW to lock in these benefits today if approved.
Great for: Flat-Rate Cash Rewards
Intro APR 0% intro APR for 12 months from account opening on purchases and qualifying balance transfers
Purchases: 0% intro APR for 12 months from account opening on purchases
Balance Transfers: 0% intro APR for 12 months from account opening on qualifying balance transfers
Regular APR
Rewards Earn unlimited 2% cash rewards on purchases.
Annual Fee
Welcome Offer Earn a $100 cash rewards bonus after spending $500 in purchases in the first 3 months.
Unlimited 2% cash rewards -- Cardholders earn an unlimited 2% cash rewards on purchases, with no categories to activate or earnings limits to track.
There are other cards that offer higher cash back rates on certain categories, and while they can be worth it, they do require more effort. And they often are also subject to a cap and limited in what purchases they apply to. The Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card is perfect for someone that wants an easy-to-use card that still offers high rewards: you’ll earn a best-in-class flat rewards right away on your purchases -- with no limits or hoops to jump through.
$100 cash rewards welcome offer -- New Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card holders can earn a $100 cash rewards welcome offer for spending just $500 in purchases in the first 3 months. Not only is this a very competitive sign-up bonus for a card with no annual fee, but it's also one of the things that sets this Wells Fargo credit card apart from other 2% back cards. We’ve yet to come across another credit card with 2% unlimited cash rewards that also has a sign-up bonus.
12 months from account opening 0% APR intro offer -- New cardholders can enjoy 0% intro APR on both new purchases and qualifying balance transfers for a full 12 months from account opening. (After that period, a go-to rate of 18.49%, 24.49%, or 28.49% Variable APR applies.) That's a great offer, even when compared to cards marketed just for a 0% intro APR. It means that this card will allow you to avoid interest on purchases and balance transfers for a full year!
No annual fee -- In many cases, high rewards rates mean high annual fees. Not with the Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card, which sports a $0 annual fee.
Cell phone protection -- With the price of a typical cell phone in the hundreds of dollars, having some sort of insurance is a good idea. With this Wells Fargo card, you can get built-in cell phone protection of up to $600 just by paying your cell phone bill with your card. Coverage is subject to a $25 deductible.
Approval for the Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card is most likely for applicants with good credit, which typically means a credit score of 670 or higher. If you need help rebuilding your credit, see this page.
We believe this is one of the best cash back cards for most people. Not only will you get a lucrative unlimited flat cash rewards rate, but it also sports a hefty, easy-to-earn sign-up bonus and a highly competitive 0% intro APR for 12 months from account opening on purchases and qualifying balance transfers, then 18.49%, 24.49%, or 28.49% Variable APR.
Depending on what card is in your wallet today, there’s a high chance the Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card is a more lucrative upgrade -- and it could especially be an upgrade over debit cards, which have far worse fraud protections than credit cards and usually no rewards.
To apply for potential approval today and make sure you don’t miss out on your bonus, simply click here: Wells Fargo Active Cash® Card
Credit cards with rewards & 0% intro APR offers are excellent, but remember, they are a tool to help you get the most out of your spending. Motley Fool Money motto to follow:
Follow this and you'll be making your money work overtime for you. Live richly, not risky.
Intro APR
Purchases: 0% intro on purchases for 15 months
Balance Transfers: 0% intro on balance transfers for 15 months (Balance Transfer Fee Applies)
Rewards Earn unlimited 1.5% cash back on every purchase, every day. Earn unlimited 5% cash back on hotels, vacation rentals and rental cars booked through Capital One Travel.
Welcome Offer Earn $200 Cash Back after you spend $500 on purchases within 3 months from account opening
Purchases: N/A
Balance Transfers: 0%, 18 months on Balance Transfers
Rewards Earn 2% on every purchase with unlimited 1% cash back when you buy, plus an additional 1% as you pay for those purchases. To earn cash back, pay at least the minimum due on time. Plus, earn 5% total cash back on hotel, car rentals and attractions booked with Citi Travel.
Annual Fee N/A
Welcome Offer Earn $200 cash back after you spend $1,500 on purchases in the first 6 months of account opening. This bonus offer will be fulfilled as 20,000 ThankYou® Points, which can be redeemed for $200 cash back.
Our Credit Cards Experts
We're firm believers in the Golden Rule, which is why editorial opinions are ours alone and have not been previously reviewed, approved, or endorsed by included advertisers. Motley Fool Money does not cover all offers on the market. Motley Fool Money is 100% owned and operated by The Motley Fool. Our knowledgeable team of personal finance editors and analysts are employed by The Motley Fool and held to the same set of publishing standards and editorial integrity while maintaining professional separation from the analysts and editors on other Motley Fool brands.
Motley Fool Stock Disclosures
JPMorgan Chase is an advertising partner of Motley Fool Money. Wells Fargo is an advertising partner of Motley Fool Money. The Motley Fool has positions in and recommends JPMorgan Chase, Target, and Visa. The Motley Fool recommends Capital One Financial and Uber Technologies. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.
