Air pollution kills more people than AIDS or terrorism, but new economic research shows that democracies like India can cut it substantially through cheap, automated emissions markets rather than costly quick-fix technologies.
Air pollution is one of the world’s biggest threats to human health, cutting life expectancy by years in some of the most polluted countries. But tackling it presents a difficult challenge: many of the activities that generate pollution – from manufacturing and construction to burning fossil fuels – are also closely tied to economic development.
So can countries clean up their air without sacrificing economic growth?
In this episode of Economics Unpacked, Anant Sudarshan and Teevrat Garg explore why air pollution has become such a severe problem across South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, what researchers have learnt about its effects on life expectancy, and which policies can actually reduce pollution.
Transcript
What's the second biggest cause of premature death on the planet? The answer may surprise you: air pollution.
Anant Sudarshan: Air pollution is probably causing more deaths than infectious diseases, more deaths than terrorism, more deaths than AIDS. And these are all things that we have put a lot of money and time into trying to solve.
Yet air pollution rarely gets the attention it deserves. What's going on, and what can be done about it?
Welcome to Economics Unpacked, a VoxDev series where we talk to experts to try and answer the big questions in development.
Anant Sudarshan: Air pollution is a huge problem for two reasons. First, it has dramatically high health impacts, and that's something we've started to learn over the last two decades. In developing countries where pollution is worse – say, in a country like India – there's a loss in life expectancy of over five years.
For hundreds of millions of people in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, breathing the air outside is a daily health emergency. And air pollution is a tough challenge to solve for countries looking to also develop their economies.
Anant Sudarshan: The second problem is it's sort of a double whammy, because these countries are trying to grow economically, and the causes of air pollution are burning fossil fuels like coal, activities like construction and so on. Those things all go up as a part of economic growth, and you need that energy to grow quickly. So you've got this problem: you have poor people who are very vulnerable, you want them to grow richer so they can protect themselves more, and you want to clean the air. At the same time, the pathway to doing that is going to produce even more air pollution off of a base which is already incredibly high.
And the levels of pollution are stark.
Teevrat Garg: Many cities in South Asia – Lahore, Karachi, New Delhi, Dhaka – air pollution levels are routinely orders of magnitude above what the WHO recommends. The WHO's annual recommendations are about 3.5 to 5 micrograms per cubic metre as an annual average. And what we're seeing in many of these major cities in South Asia is that these levels are routinely above 100 micrograms per cubic metre annually, which means that you're 20 to 25 times above what the WHO recommended averages.
How did this problem get so bad?
Anant Sudarshan: One puzzle is that in these highly polluted countries like India, one hypothesis you might come up with is that, hey, if pollution levels are so high, it must be because there aren't the norms and rules in place that you see in cleaner countries. But it turns out there's plenty of rules on paper. It's just that the same policies that maybe worked in the United States forty years ago don't seem to work given the state capacity that is present in India. Testing solutions first requires thinking of solutions, and that requires thinking of something genuinely new, because you can't necessarily copy and paste what richer countries are doing onto poorer countries.
Another reason may be that it's a hard problem to understand and to study.
Anant Sudarshan: If you're studying a part of the world that's highly polluted, everybody is exposed to the same levels of pollution. It's very hard to come up with this question of what if this population was in a cleaner environment, because you don't actually observe anyone else – that is, anyone living in a clean environment.
Many studies use data from developed countries, but these don't capture the scale of the problem in developing countries.
Teevrat Garg: We have a very good understanding of what happens when you move from 10 micrograms per cubic metre of exposure down to, you know, 6 or 5 micrograms per cubic metre. That's not the policy counterfactual that we are able to think about in low- and middle-income countries. In Delhi, for instance, we're thinking about what happens when you move from exposure above 100 micrograms per cubic metre to something like 60 to 70 micrograms per cubic metre.
But there has been one hugely influential study in China.
Anant Sudarshan: This paper looked at the Huai River policy – a policy that gave free heating coal to the population north of the Huai River in China, and did not do that for the population just south. And what these academics did was they said, "Okay, let's collect 70 years of data on births and deaths, as well as levels of pollution, north and south of this river, in a setting where, because of the hukou system, migration is very restricted. And we'll just see how long people live in places where they're using a lot of coal to heat their houses, and places where they're not doing that." And they find very large effects on life expectancy. And we can take those numbers and then ask, in countries like India where you don't have this with-and-without comparison, but now you know how much the pollution damages life expectancy – you can translate that to other countries and quantify the problem in health terms. And that is very, very important, because that tells us how much attention and how much money we should spend on solving it.
That's why two economists have done a review of what we know and what we need to do.
Anant Sudarshan: So we have a review – pull together this research, organise it, and make it tell a story that helps everybody get on the same page as to what we know and what we need to do.
And what have they found? First, how to fix the air once it's dirty.
Teevrat Garg: One of the ways that you can protect yourself from air pollution is by doing what's called private defensive behaviour. This is anything from putting on a mask, or staying in places that have less air pollution, or using an air purifier. Now, these private defensive behaviours can be quite effective, depending on what you're choosing to do, but of course the ability to access these is quite unequal.
There's also the issue that even when people have air purifiers and are well informed, they may not use them nearly enough.
Teevrat Garg: So you can put air purifiers anywhere you want, but ultimately people also have to use them. And what we found is that in factory settings in Bangladesh they were being used for, you know, on average four to six or even eight hours a day during the workday, but in households they were barely being used for 20 to 25 minutes a day. And I think what this points out is a gap in terms of where we should be thinking about strategic investments for indoor air filtration. Hospitals, schools, offices, factories – those can be very, very important. So where some of these decisions are being made, where they don't rely on every single individual acting in an optimal manner, I think that's going to be very key for thinking about air purifier investments.
But isn't the problem best solved at the root?
Anant Sudarshan: It's very hard to clean up the outside air once pollution has got in there. So if you're talking about lowering outdoor air pollution, you absolutely have to look to where the pollution is coming from, whether it's cars or factories.
What can countries learn from China?
Anant Sudarshan: China is a huge source of optimism. If you ask, have pollution levels across the planet been reducing or increasing, you will see a slight reduction over the last decade or two, all of that comes from China. In fact, South Asia has been getting worse, but China has improved so much that it drags down the global average. So if you want to ask yourself, can this problem be solved, and how might it be solved, you have to look towards China.
Can countries copy China?
Anant Sudarshan: The challenge is that China is not a democracy, which means it can efficiently put in place a large number of fairly harsh actions that might make a lot of sense from a cost-benefit point of view, but which in a democracy would engender a huge amount of opposition and would pretty much guarantee that you lose an election. And so this is a problem in countries like India.
So what can be done? Enter market-based solutions.
Anant Sudarshan: It seems that the requirements they place on the state to implement them well match up much better with what the actual ground realities are. For example, you need fewer staff, you have automated monitoring, and you have penalties that are fines, so they can be imposed automatically rather than dragging someone to court and putting them in jail. So for a whole lot of reasons, it turns out that these emission markets seem to work very well in a setting like India. My research, for example – a large pilot market that we conducted with the government of Gujarat, which is one of India's most industrialised states – found that we were able to cut pollution from factories by between 20 to 30%. What this means is that you can cut pollution without hurting economic growth, which is fundamental to finding a solution in developing countries.
And to be clear, these cap-and-trade markets are quite different from carbon offsetting, which, as we explained in another video, has its own challenges.
Anant Sudarshan: What's nice about conventional cap-and-trade markets is that, because they're tackling pollution from factories, there is no uncertainty about who is emitting how much. The tracking is done with essentially pollution meters in the factory's smokestack, so you know exactly how much everyone is emitting. You're charging them on how much is polluted, and if they want to pollute more, they have to buy permits from someone else who has to lower their pollution – all of which is tracked with meters. So it's fundamentally different from the carbon offset markets, and this is a confusion that people sometimes have; they're two very different types of markets.
And what about technology? Can't that just clean things up afterwards?
Anant Sudarshan: One of the red herrings that we need to stay away from, which unfortunately is perhaps very attractive to politicians looking for a quick win, is an attempt to use technology to clean up the air after the fact. This includes things like spraying water on roads or trying to create artificial rain. These are distractions, is what the evidence shows. They don't work very well, they're incredibly expensive, and they have the illusion of moving forward while you're not addressing the cause of this disease, even as you're attempting to tamp down on the symptoms.
So what's the takeaway?
Anant Sudarshan: Air pollution – let's remind ourselves, this is the optimistic part of the story – has been solved, or has been reduced, in many parts of the world which have a whole lot of economic activity going on. Most recently, the example that comes out the most here is China, which has substantially cut air pollution even as it's manufacturing goods for every country on the planet. So you can solve the problem. The question is: what are the rules of the game that a democratic government can enforce that will work in practice, not just on paper, and that will lower pollution?
And how do we better understand what will work?
Teevrat Garg: As the old saying goes, the first step to solving a problem is recognising that there is one. Part of the reason why air pollution has long remained a problem in many countries in the world is that there simply wasn't a lot of effort put into monitoring it. Just 15 years ago, India barely had any notable network of sensors to monitor air pollution, and now has a fairly dense network of monitoring for air pollution. But other countries in South Asia have lagged behind, and the countries in sub-Saharan Africa have lagged behind too. So investing in that monitoring infrastructure is quite crucial, both to understand the scale of the problem, to design effective policies to control it, and then to monitor whether those policies were actually effective in solving the problem of air pollution.
You can find out more about this research in our VoxDevLit – link in the description. You've been watching Economics Unpacked. If you enjoyed this episode, please like, share, subscribe.
