The takeaway
The most recent measure of the cost of owning a home (vs. renting a home) remains near historical peaks, suggesting renting today is a relatively better financial choice for housing.
To own or not to own?
Which is the better financial choice—owning or renting your home? The FRED Blog has discussed how the cost of owning a home and the cost of renting a home tend to move together. An indexed ratio of house prices to rents helps show their relative values more clearly and, by extension, can help examine the value of one choice over the other.
A high ratio means house prices are growing faster than rents, making homeownership a relatively more expensive proposition. A lower ratio means buying a home is a comparatively better deal.
The data
Researchers at the Dallas Fed used price index data for homeownership and renting to create an index that shows the rapid rise of homeownership costs in 2020 and the high values since then.
Our FRED graph above allows us to approximate their ratio and track the relative cost of owning a home from first quarter 1975 to first quarter 2026. Here we use two different price indexes to create our ratio of house prices to rents: the all-transactions house price index from the U.S. Federal Housing Finance Agency and the CPI for rents from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Both indexes were “re-based” to a value of 100 in January 2015. Our index shows a rapid rise and continued high values of homeownership cost, similar to what the Dallas Fed research showed.
Deeper analysis
The report from the Dallas Fed uses both U.S. and international data to identify patterns and the likely future evolution of an elevated house price-to-rent ratio. It concludes that “Rents rise along with inflation, while nominal house-price growth trails inflation. On an inflation-adjusted basis, rents change very little, but house prices fall sharply.”
In this homeownership costs ratio, the numerator is house prices and the denominator is rent prices. The ratio will become smaller if the numerator falls or the denominator rises. Because inflation increases rent prices relatively more than house prices, higher inflation would drive the ratio down, closer to its historical average.
How this graph was created: Search FRED for and select the series “All-Transactions House Price Index for the United States.” Click “Edit Graph,” use “Customize data” to search for “Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Rent of primary residence,” and click “Add.” Input the formula a/b and click “Apply.”
Suggested by Houston Myer and Diego Mendez-Carbajo.
